docs/src/main/paradox/project/downstream-upgrade-strategy.md, before:

---
project.description: Upgrade strategy for downstream libraries
---
# Downstream upgrade strategy

When a new Akka version is released, downstream projects (such as
[Akka Management](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-management/current/),
[Akka HTTP](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-http/current/) and
[Akka gRPC](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-grpc/current/))
do not need to update immediately: because of our
@ref[binary compatibility](../common/binary-compatibility-rules.md) approach,
applications can take advantage of the latest version of Akka without having to
wait for intermediate libraries to update.

## Patch versions

When releasing a new patch version of Akka (e.g. 2.5.22), we typically don't
immediately bump the Akka version in satellite projects.

The reason for this is this will make it more low-friction for users to update
those satellite projects: say their project is on Akka 2.5.22 and
Akka Management 1.0.0, and we release Akka Management 1.0.1 (still built with
Akka 2.5.22) and Akka 2.5.23. They can safely update to Akka Management 1.0.1
without also updating to Akka 2.5.23, or update to Akka 2.5.23 without updating
to Akka Management 1.0.1.

When there is reason for a satellite project to upgrade the Akka patch
version, they are free to do so at any time.

## Minor versions

When releasing a new minor version of Akka (e.g. 2.6.0), satellite projects are
also usually not updated immediately, but as needed.

When a satellite project does update to a new minor version of Akka, it will
also increase its own minor version. The previous stable branch will enter the
usual end-of-support lifecycle for Lightbend customers, and only important
bugfixes will be backported to the previous version and released.

For example, when Akka 2.5.0 was released, Akka HTTP 10.0.x continued to depend
on Akka 2.4. When it was time to update Akka HTTP to Akka 2.5, 10.1.0 was
created, but 10.0.x was maintained for backward compatibility for a period of
time according to Lightbend's support policy.

Commit message:

Rename Akka to Pekko in documentation
Also adapt/remove small blocks of text that were no longer consistent or adequate

docs/src/main/paradox/project/downstream-upgrade-strategy.md, after:

---
project.description: Upgrade strategy for downstream libraries
---
# Downstream upgrade strategy

When a new Pekko version is released, downstream projects (such as
[Pekko Management](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-management/current/),
[Pekko HTTP](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-http/current/) and
[Pekko gRPC](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka-grpc/current/))
do not need to update immediately: because of our
@ref[binary compatibility](../common/binary-compatibility-rules.md) approach,
applications can take advantage of the latest version of Pekko without having to
wait for intermediate libraries to update.

## Patch versions

When releasing a new patch version of Pekko (e.g. 2.5.22), we typically don't
immediately bump the Pekko version in satellite projects.

The reason for this is this will make it more low-friction for users to update
those satellite projects: say their project is on Pekko 2.5.22 and
Pekko Management 1.0.0, and we release Pekko Management 1.0.1 (still built with
Pekko 2.5.22) and Pekko 2.5.23. They can safely update to Pekko Management 1.0.1
without also updating to Pekko 2.5.23, or update to Pekko 2.5.23 without updating
to Pekko Management 1.0.1.

When there is reason for a satellite project to upgrade the Pekko patch
version, they are free to do so at any time.

## Minor versions

When releasing a new minor version of Pekko (e.g. 2.6.0), satellite projects are
also usually not updated immediately, but as needed.

When a satellite project does update to a new minor version of Pekko, it will
also increase its own minor version. The previous stable branch will enter the
usual end-of-support lifecycle and only important
bugfixes will be backported to the previous version and released.
