docs/src/main/paradox/general/jmm.md, before:

---
project.description: Akka, Actors, Futures and the Java Memory Model.
---
# Akka and the Java Memory Model

A major benefit of using the Lightbend Platform, including Scala and Akka, is that it simplifies the process of writing
concurrent software.  This article discusses how the Lightbend Platform, and Akka in particular, approaches shared memory
in concurrent applications.

## The Java Memory Model

Prior to Java 5, the Java Memory Model (JMM) was ill defined. It was possible to get all kinds of strange results when
shared memory was accessed by multiple threads, such as:

 * a thread not seeing values written by other threads: a visibility problem
 * a thread observing 'impossible' behavior of other threads, caused by
instructions not being executed in the order expected: an instruction
reordering problem.

With the implementation of JSR 133 in Java 5, a lot of these issues have been resolved. The JMM is a set of rules based
on the "happens-before" relation, which constrain when one memory access must happen before another, and conversely,
when they are allowed to happen out of order. Two examples of these rules are:

 * **The monitor lock rule:** a release of a lock happens before every subsequent acquire of the same lock.
 * **The volatile variable rule:** a write of a volatile variable happens before every subsequent read of the same volatile variable

Although the JMM can seem complicated, the specification tries to find a balance between ease of use and the ability to
write performant and scalable concurrent data structures.

## Actors and the Java Memory Model

With the Actors implementation in Akka, there are two ways multiple threads can execute actions on shared memory:

 * if a message is sent to an actor (e.g. by another actor). In most cases messages are immutable, but if that message
is not a properly constructed immutable object, without a "happens before" rule, it would be possible for the receiver
to see partially initialized data structures and possibly even values out of thin air (longs/doubles).
 * if an actor makes changes to its internal state while processing a message, and accesses that state while processing
another message moments later. It is important to realize that with the actor model you don't get any guarantee that
the same thread will be executing the same actor for different messages.

To prevent visibility and reordering problems on actors, Akka guarantees the following two "happens before" rules:

 * **The actor send rule:** the send of the message to an actor happens before the receive of that message by the same actor.
 * **The actor subsequent processing rule:** processing of one message happens before processing of the next message by the same actor.

@@@ note

In layman's terms this means that changes to internal fields of the actor are visible when the next message
is processed by that actor. So fields in your actor need not be volatile or equivalent.

@@@

Both rules only apply for the same actor instance and are not valid if different actors are used.

## Futures and the Java Memory Model

The completion of a Future "happens before" the invocation of any callbacks registered to it are executed.

We recommend not to close over non-final fields (final in Java and val in Scala), and if you *do* choose to close over
non-final fields, they must be marked *volatile* in order for the current value of the field to be visible to the callback.

If you close over a reference, you must also ensure that the instance that is referred to is thread safe.
We highly recommend staying away from objects that use locking, since it can introduce performance problems and in the worst case, deadlocks.
Such are the perils of synchronized.

<a id="jmm-shared-state"></a>
## Actors and shared mutable state

Since Akka runs on the JVM there are still some rules to be followed.

Most importantly, you must not close over internal Actor state and exposing it to other threads:

Scala
: @@snip [SharedMutableStateDocSpec.scala](/docs/src/test/scala/docs/actor/typed/SharedMutableStateDocSpec.scala) { #mutable-state }

Java
: @@snip [DistributedDataDocTest.java](/docs/src/test/java/jdocs/actor/typed/SharedMutableStateDocTest.java) { #mutable-state }


 * Messages **should** be immutable, this is to avoid the shared mutable state trap.

Commit message:

Renames in doc #98 (#100)
* Rename some base_url values in Paradox.scala
* Rename Akka to Pekko in documentation, also adapt/remove small blocks of text that were no longer consistent or adequate
* Rename Akka to Pekko in some related files outside the doc directory
* Rename akka-bom to pekko-bom
* Rename artifacts prefixes from akka to pekko
* Add links to Apache documents in licenses.md
* Add links to Akka migration guides for earlier versions

docs/src/main/paradox/general/jmm.md, after:

---
project.description: Pekko, Actors, Futures and the Java Memory Model.
---
# Pekko and the Java Memory Model

A major benefit of using Pekko is that it simplifies the process of writing
concurrent software.  This article discusses how the Pekko Platform approaches shared memory
in concurrent applications.

## The Java Memory Model

Prior to Java 5, the Java Memory Model (JMM) was ill defined. It was possible to get all kinds of strange results when
shared memory was accessed by multiple threads, such as:

 * a thread not seeing values written by other threads: a visibility problem
 * a thread observing 'impossible' behavior of other threads, caused by
instructions not being executed in the order expected: an instruction
reordering problem.

With the implementation of JSR 133 in Java 5, a lot of these issues have been resolved. The JMM is a set of rules based
on the "happens-before" relation, which constrain when one memory access must happen before another, and conversely,
when they are allowed to happen out of order. Two examples of these rules are:

 * **The monitor lock rule:** a release of a lock happens before every subsequent acquire of the same lock.
 * **The volatile variable rule:** a write of a volatile variable happens before every subsequent read of the same volatile variable

Although the JMM can seem complicated, the specification tries to find a balance between ease of use and the ability to
write performant and scalable concurrent data structures.

## Actors and the Java Memory Model

With the Actors implementation in Pekko, there are two ways multiple threads can execute actions on shared memory:

 * if a message is sent to an actor (e.g. by another actor). In most cases messages are immutable, but if that message
is not a properly constructed immutable object, without a "happens before" rule, it would be possible for the receiver
to see partially initialized data structures and possibly even values out of thin air (longs/doubles).
 * if an actor makes changes to its internal state while processing a message, and accesses that state while processing
another message moments later. It is important to realize that with the actor model you don't get any guarantee that
the same thread will be executing the same actor for different messages.

To prevent visibility and reordering problems on actors, Pekko guarantees the following two "happens before" rules:

 * **The actor send rule:** the send of the message to an actor happens before the receive of that message by the same actor.
 * **The actor subsequent processing rule:** processing of one message happens before processing of the next message by the same actor.

@@@ note

In layman's terms this means that changes to internal fields of the actor are visible when the next message
is processed by that actor. So fields in your actor need not be volatile or equivalent.

@@@

Both rules only apply for the same actor instance and are not valid if different actors are used.

## Futures and the Java Memory Model

The completion of a Future "happens before" the invocation of any callbacks registered to it are executed.

We recommend not to close over non-final fields (final in Java and val in Scala), and if you *do* choose to close over
non-final fields, they must be marked *volatile* in order for the current value of the field to be visible to the callback.

If you close over a reference, you must also ensure that the instance that is referred to is thread safe.
We highly recommend staying away from objects that use locking, since it can introduce performance problems and in the worst case, deadlocks.
Such are the perils of synchronized.

<a id="jmm-shared-state"></a>
## Actors and shared mutable state

Since Pekko runs on the JVM there are still some rules to be followed.

Most importantly, you must not close over internal Actor state and exposing it to other threads:

Scala
: @@snip [SharedMutableStateDocSpec.scala](/docs/src/test/scala/docs/actor/typed/SharedMutableStateDocSpec.scala) { #mutable-state }

Java
: @@snip [DistributedDataDocTest.java](/docs/src/test/java/jdocs/actor/typed/SharedMutableStateDocTest.java) { #mutable-state }


 * Messages **should** be immutable, this is to avoid the shared mutable state trap.
